---
title: Why reactive programming
author: Julien Verlaguet
date: 2023-07-1
category: Reactive programming
layout: post
---

Ever wondered why software is so broken?

Everywhere I look, software is broken. My TV lags. It lags so bad that
sometimes I which I could debug what's going on when I touch the
remote. How can it possibly take 15 seconds to do something? 15
seconds! On modern hardware, that's like ... an eternity. My apps are
out of sync. I find myself praying that won't lose the network. Things
get even worse when I am on the web. And everything is slow. Sooooo
slow. Everything crashes ... all the time. Which makes me wonder: am I
the only one noticing this? Why can't it just work? Here is what I
want: when I touch something, I want all the changes to propagate
across the network. If I reconnect using a different device, I want
all my data, locally, in sync.  Everything is connected these
days. Everything should be live, up-to-date, at all times. We could do
it. So why don't we? Why do I have to refresh anything? Ever?  We have
the hardware to do it, so why don't we?

The answer is state: we don't know how to manage state. Transmitting
 updates to a server would necessitate refreshing many server-side
 caches, which in turn would trigger updates to services etc ... This
 process is full of cache/state updates at every level. The problem
 is: we don't have the tools to write such programs.

## Streams of updates

Our current mindset is focused on streams of messages. Unfortunately,
this approach is fundamentally misguided. The truth is, if your
strategy involves sending updates from point A to point B, while
trying to devise logic to update your state, you are going to get it
wrong. Your options boil down to either 1) assembling a massive team
of engineers to build a complex distributed state machine or 2)
simplifying the program to a trivial level such that it loses much of
its core functionality. That's the harsh reality - these are the sole
feasible alternatives if you are thinking it terms of streams of
updates. That's because updating your state is a hard problem, that
has been known to be hard for a very long time, it goes by the name of
cache invalidation.

![alt text](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pikatchu/website/master/img/ABCache.png)

## Cache invalidation (aka: the programmer's nightmare)

Imagine your program receives an update, and then you as a programmer,
need to write the code that will invalidate the caches. Without a
record of all cache reads, you're left in the dark about which caches
require updating and how to do it. Of course, maintaining such a
record would be too expensive at runtime, so what can you do? Well,
there isn't much to do ... and that's where the problem lies.

To effectively program the cache invalidation logic, you need to hold
all the possible state of the program in your head. Of course, that's
impossible. And the fun goes on! In a distributed system, the problem
multiplies, as you have to manage states across multiple
machines. Clearly, this is an impossible task, and that's why cache
invalidation has such a bad reputation. So what's the solution? The
solution is to think about the problem differently.

## The Magic of Spreadsheets

A long time ago ... in a galaxy far far away (in the 70s that is),
spreadsheets were invented. Spreadsheets were probably the first
instance of reactive programming, with one limitation: the program's
state was made of rows and columns and was not meant to grow
dynamically (the program cannot create new columns or rows at
runtime).

So, how do we 'program' a spreadsheet? We do this by writing
formulas. These formulas serve to form connections between cells. The
distinguishing feature of this programming style is that a formula is
declarative. We don't need to specify which cells require updating, or
what happens if two cells are altered simultaneously, and so on. These
details are left to the runtime. Our primary concern is the
relationship between cells, not how they update. This is the essence
of reactive programming.

Let's take another, more recent, example. Ever heard of React.js?
Traditional UI development used to involve manually updating the UI
state in response to user events. Of course, when the App was not
updating the way it should, it was impossible to understand what lead
to this corrupt state and it was therefore impossible to fix.

React.js addressed this by embracing reactive programming. The library
automatically manages when and how updates are made. So how are
React.js and spreadsheets linked? Both encourage you to operate under
the assumption that time is frozen. Whether in React or in a
spreadsheet, you construct your logic based on the premise that the
state will not change. Why? Because deciding what to do when the app
updates is not your job, that is the job of the runtime.

And this why reactive programming is such a powerful paradigm. By
removing time from the equation, we simplify the problem
dramatically. How could there be corrupt state when there is no state
to corrupt in the fist place? You just focus on what matters. The
logic of your application. The hard (and uninteresting) part will be
dealt with for you.

Now let's dream a little. Picture a spreadsheet engine that isn't
confined to the strictures of rows and columns, or a version of
React.js that isn't just tied to UI; picture a reactive programming
language that can be utilized as freely as any other language to
construct anything. Furthermore, envision it as a solution to model
distributed systems, where state can reside on various machines across
a network. What would a language like that look like?
  
## Conceiving SKIP

Regardless of the chosen method, to run an efficient reactive program,
some form of caching is needed. Because the efficiency of the model is
essentially dependent on the extent to which it reuses previously
computed results. The crux of the issue, or "the million-dollar
question," is whether copying is required when inserting or retrieving
an object from the cache. If the answer is 'no,' designing a reactive
system is simple. If the answer is 'yes,' the game changes
dramatically.

With copying, all we need to do is to keep track of the graph of
dependencies. Concretely, we need to know that we needed object X and
Y to build Z, so that if X or Y were to change at any point in time,
we would know to recompute Z. Without copying, things are more
complicated, because there needs to be immutability guarantees on the
objects involved. If an object in the cache is mutable, it could be
altered unknowingly, resulting in an undebuggable nightmare.

### Limitations of Existing Languages

Mainstream programming languages like Java, Python, or C++ don't
provide the immutability guarantees needed for reactive
programming. Although they do have some notion of immutability, like
`const`, it's insufficient. 'Const' guarantees that a function won't
modify an object, but it doesn't guarantee that no one else holds a
mutable reference to the object. So how can we get those guarantees we
need?

#### Option 1: A Purely Functional Approach

One way around this is to use a purely functional programming
language, which doesn't have this problem because everything is
immutable. However, this approach can lead to complications when
maintaining state, because purely functional programs need monads to
represent state. For those unfamiliar with the concept, monads involve
"threading" state. This means that rather than directly altering an
object, each function within the monad receives the present state of
the world as input. The function must then return the new
world state, which it passes on to the subsequent function, and so on.

Unfortunately, This is a direct contrast to the incremental nature
that we seek in reactive programming.  In a reactive program, our aim
is to maintain the independence of individual states. In practical
terms, if states A and B are unrelated, we don't wish to have to
recalculate B when A changes. The problem is, if we formulated the
logic of A and B using the monad, any change in A will automatically
result in a recalculation of B, which directly contradicts our goal.

#### Option 2: Adding a Type System to an Existing Language

Another approach involves adding a type system to an existing language
to provide the necessary immutability guarantees. Unfortunately, this
approach yields a language that is completely incompatible with the
original one. For instance, adding a type system to Java, resulting in
'Immutable Java,' creates a language that cannot interact efficiently
with Java due to incompatible mutability guarantees. That's because
when 'Immutable Java' tries to call 'Java', we don't know what objects
that were supposed to be immutable could have been modified. The same
is true the other way around. If 'Java' calls into 'Immutable Java',
we could be storing supposedly immutable objects into a cache when
really 'Java' was still holding a mutable version of them.

### The Need for a New Language

And that's why we need a new language. A language in which we can
modify objects directly, keeping independent pieces of state separate,
but that also provides the necessary immutability guarantees that we
need. This is why we've developed 'Skip.'
